Create 2024-04-02-shared-conda-tutorial.md (#12)
ubinfie/ubinfie.github.io: _posts/2024-04-02-shared-conda-tutorial.md

# -u         update an existing installation (needed to install in existing dir)
# -p PREFIX  install prefix, defaults to $PREFIX, must not contain spaces.
sudo bash /tmp/conda_installer.sh -b -u -p "${CONDA_PATH}"

# Set default conda settings for all users
# (these will show up in $CONDA_PATH/.condarc)
sudo "${CONDA_PATH}"/bin/conda config --system --set channel_priority strict
sudo "${CONDA_PATH}"/bin/conda config --system --add channels defaults
sudo "${CONDA_PATH}"/bin/conda config --system --add channels bioconda
sudo "${CONDA_PATH}"/bin/conda config --system --add channels conda-forge
```

Users can override default conda settings in their own `$HOME/.condarc` configuration files.

### Creating environments in the shared conda installation
Any user with sudo privileges can create environments in the shared folder, simply with
```bash
sudo conda create -n myenv ...
```

### Using the shared conda installation
Users can activate the shared conda base environment by running
```bash
/apps/conda/bin/conda init
```
to permanently initialize it for their user.
This will add a section to the user's `$HOME/.bashrc`, which activates the shared conda base environment upon login.  

> For activating an environment, one just run `conda activate myenv`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For activating a shared environment users just run `conda activate myenv` as usual.
```

---
layout: post
title: An ideal setup for a multi-user conda installation
tags:
  - conda
  - bash
  - systems-administration
contributors:
- boulund
- pmenzel

> - hexylena

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- hexylena
reviewers:
- karinlag
- bebatut
```

Reviewer 2: I think in the future it could be interesting to automate this, have a github workflow that responds to [pull request reviews](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/events-that-trigger-workflows#pull_request_review) and automatically suggests adding their name to the PR.

---
layout: post
title: The ideal setup for a multi-user conda installation

> tags: conda bash systems-administration

Reviewer 3: Maybe better as a list here. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: Both are acceptable from the frontmatter perspective, they're treated equivalently by `jekyll-tagging`.

  - conda
  - bash
  - systems-administration
contributors:
- boulund
- pmenzel
- hexylena
---

[Conda](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/stable/) and [Bioconda](https://bioconda.github.io/) have become crucial tools in most bioinformatician's toolkit. It is often used to install applications and create reproducible software environments containing multiple programs on their system or a compute cluster. 

On multi-user systems (e.g. shared Linux servers), multiple users can share the same conda installation and the environments thererin. This is a good idea and usually works well when only already existing environments are re-used, but can become tricky when users also want to create environments (using `conda create`) into the shared conda installation. On a standard Linux system, this often results in permission problems when (re-)downloading packages and overwriting files that were created by others.

Here we describe a setup with a shared (read-only) conda installation, containing re-usable shared environments, and private per-user environments.

## Tutorial

### Creating the shared conda installation

> First, we create a shared conda installation folder that is read-only for all regular users. Shared conda environments therein will be available to all users, but must be created by a sysadmin (or by a user with write-privileges for the conda folder). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we create a shared conda installation folder that is read-only for all regular users. Shared conda environments that will be available to all users can be created by a sysadmin (or by a user with write-privileges for the shared conda folder). 
```

> In this tutorial we'll use `/apps/conda` as the path, but please choose something appropriate for your system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial we'll use `/apps/conda` as the shared conda folder, but please choose something appropriate for your system.
```

# Download Miniconda installer
CONDA_URL="https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh"
wget "${CONDA_URL}" --output-document=/tmp/conda_installer.sh

# Install Miniconda
# -b          run install in batch mode (without manual intervention),
#             it is expected the license terms (if any) are agreed upon
# -u         update an existing installation (needed to install in existing dir)
# -p PREFIX  install prefix, defaults to $PREFIX, must not contain spaces.
sudo bash /tmp/conda_installer.sh -b -u -p "${CONDA_PATH}"

# Set default conda settings for all users
# (these will show up in $CONDA_PATH/.condarc)
sudo "${CONDA_PATH}"/bin/conda config --system --set channel_priority strict
sudo "${CONDA_PATH}"/bin/conda config --system --add channels defaults
sudo "${CONDA_PATH}"/bin/conda config --system --add channels bioconda
sudo "${CONDA_PATH}"/bin/conda config --system --add channels conda-forge
```

Users can override default conda settings in their own `$HOME/.condarc` configuration files.

### Creating environments in the shared conda installation
Any user with sudo privileges can create environments in the shared folder:
```bash

> # activate base 

Reviewer: I would probably recommend paring this down to a simple: 
```
sudo /apps/conda/bin/conda create -n myenv ...
```
This will create `myenv` in the shared environments folder (i.e. `/apps/conda/envs/myenv`) so it will be accessible for all users.

> Users can override the default conda settings in their own `$HOME/.condarc` configuration file, [(see more)](https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/configuration/admin-multi-user-install.html#user-configuration-file).

Author: The page linked here is not really helpful, I think. It describes a specific case that is different from the one in this post..

Reviewer: Fair enough. Maybe it's distracting rather than helpful to see the official docs since it doesn't really cover exactly the same thing.

Author: So remove the whole sentence. There is nothing for a standard user to override in our scenaria..

> Users can override the default conda settings in their own `$HOME/.condarc` configuration file, [(see more)](https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/configuration/admin-multi-user-install.html#user-configuration-file).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Any user with sudo privileges can create environments in the shared folder simply with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any user with sudo privileges can create environments in the shared folder:
```

```bash
sudo /apps/conda/bin/conda create -n myenv ...
```

### Using the shared conda installation

> Users can activate the shared conda base environment by running

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users can activate the shared conda base environment by running:
```

```bash
/apps/conda/bin/conda init
```
to permanently initialize it for their user.
This will add a section to the user's `$HOME/.bashrc`, which activates the shared conda base environment upon login.  
For activating an environment users just run `conda activate myenv` as usual. This works for both shared and the user's own environments.

> If users prefer not to automatically activate conda upon login, they can also run 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If users prefer not to automatically activate conda upon login, they can also run:
```

If users prefer not to automatically activate conda upon login, users can also opt to manually run 
```bash
source /apps/conda/bin/activate [optional_conda_env_name]
```
to temporarily activate it each time they want to use the shared conda installation (and use conda as usual for the rest of this bash session).

### User-specific conda environments
Users can create their own custom conda environments like usual, e.g. `conda create -n myenv ...`, but since users cannot write into the shared conda installation folder conda will automatically put the users' own environments in `$HOME/.conda/envs/`. Note that environments created by users this way are unavailable to other users on the system, unless they opened up the permissions of their home folder.

## Other Tips & Tricks

### Activating Conda Dynamically

> If you do not like having conda always active due to shell startup speed impact, or having to remember to `source ...` it, you can do like @hexylena does and source it dynamically on first invocation.

Reviewer 3: It would be nice to link to @hexylena profil (GitHub or on the website) here. Wdyt?

Reviewer 2: I think I'll copy in the auto-linking from the GTN, so, for now we can ignore this.

---
layout: post
title: The ideal setup for a multi-user conda installation

> tags: conda bash cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tags: conda bash systems-administration
```

perhaps that's a more appropriate tag?

---
layout: post
title: The ideal setup for a multi-user conda installation
tags: conda bash systems-administration
contributors:
- boulund
- pmenzel
- hexylena
---

[Conda](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/stable/) and [Bioconda](https://bioconda.github.io/) have become crucial tools in most bioinformatician's toolkit. It is often used to install applications and create reproducible environments on their system or a compute cluster. 

On multi-user systems (e.g. shared Linux servers), multiple users can share  the same conda installation and the environments thererin. This is a good idea and usually works well when only already existing environments are re-used, but can become tricky when users also want to create environments (using `conda create`) into the shared conda installation. On a standard Linux system, this often results in permission problems when (re-)downloading packages and overwriting files that were created by others.

Here we describe a setup with a shared (read-only) conda installation, with re-usable shared environments, and private per-user environments.

## Tutorial

### Creating the shared conda installation

> 

Reviewer 4: Does the conda distribution matter? I.e. is this valid whether you are doing anaconda, miniconda or something else?

Reviewer: I'm not sure about other variants than Anaconda and Miniconda, but it should work with [Miniforge](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge) as well since they all have the same CLI.

First, create a shared conda installation folder that is read-only for all regular users. Shared conda environments therein, which are available to all users, must be created by the sysadmin (or with a user account with the correct privileges for the conda folder). 

> 

Reviewer 4: How would this folder be located/created when thinking of the main "conda" folder?

Reviewer: Not sure what you mean by the main conda folder in this context?

Reviewer 4: So, when you install conda, you make a directory and install it there. This is the "main conda folder". If you have installed conda a few times before, you know this. When you specify this directory here, I later on realize that this is the "main conda folder". However, when I read this just linearly from top to bottom, I got the feeling I needed an extra directory in addition to the "main conda folder".

Reviewer: Yeah that type of confusion seems unnecessary and not what we want to introduce. What would be your preferred way of phrasing this to reduce the risk of confusion?

Author: The issue is setting the permissions here properly, so we need to mkdir it explictily. 

PREFIX is quite advanced knowledge, though.

Reviewer: I rephrased things a bit, hope it makes it more clear.

In this tutorial we'll use `/apps/conda` as the path, but please choose something appropriate for your system.

We install conda by downloading and running the [Miniconda installer](https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/), but feel free to use the [full Anaconda installer](https://repo.anaconda.com/archive/) if that is your preference. We also set up folder permissions and an initial conda config, which includes the recommended [bioconda](https://bioconda.github.io/) and [conda-forge](https://conda-forge.org/) channels.

> 

Reviewer 4: Ah, indirectly answered about distro here :)

Reviewer: Do you want it to be more explicit?

Reviewer 4: Yes please, just say the distros you know this work with straight up front.

Reviewer: Well, I've personally only used it with Miniconda and Anaconda, so technically the two distros mentioned are the ones I know this works with. But I see your point. I also think it distracts from the scope of the post a bit to introduce a lot of choices and options at this stage. In my mind this post is really just a small and focused recipe for making a very run-of-the-mill standard shared conda installation. Users interested in other non-standard conda distributions probably know of some of the quirks of these already, and most likely won't need detailed hand-holding instructions anyway, don't you think?

Author: if we know those two to work, then I wouldn't mention any other and leave it like that.
